so today I thought we'd go once around
alol the demon
star and alol is the second brightest
star in the constellation of Perseus the
hero you can see it on the star map
there just next to the cluster
m34 on the border between Perseus and
Andromeda so the second brightest star
beat a
peri easy to find very easy to observe
through a telescope and people very
early on spotted something rather
unusual about this one here's an extract
from an Egyptian manuscript 3,200 years
old talking about observations with the
naked eye of course of alol and the fact
that it was varying or pulsing and this
was seen as extremely unusual and scary
behavior for a star and lots of culture
have spotted this and reported in the
documentation that's available now that
we find in the historical record and as
ascribed bad properties bad Omens and so
on to this star so calling it The Demon
star does seem entirely reasonable in
fact when you look at the star map and
look at the artwork that goes with that
the star alol relates to the uh eye of
the head of Medusa
Perseus the hero has cut the head off
magusa and done away with it um and you
can see the head there with the staring
eyes and all the snakes coming out of
the hair and so there's definitely a
demonic
Association now in more modern times
John goodrick famous Observer spotted
the fact that the variations in
brightness were very much periodic they
were every
2.87 days approximately
and you can see the light curve where
the time through 2011 there of the drops
in the light coming from algol and it's
dropping from just over magnitude 3.4
down to about magnitude 3.9 so half a
magnitude um and half a magnitude that's
about a factor of 1.5 in
brightness now John Goodrich suggested a
couple of possibilities he said maybe
there's a dark companion orbiting around
the
star blocking some of its light as it
transits across our line of sight or
maybe the star itself has got a large
dark spot on it and when the dark spot
is turned towards us there's a much uh
reduced amount of light coming our way
but actually this rather more recent
data that we've got here shows two dips
in the light curve alternating there's a
main dip and then between them a lesser
dip in exactly halfway and that the
Baseline up there at about magnitude
3.35 3.4 isn't constant it's a curve
with these dips in so what's going on
well it was Harvard astronomer Edward
Pickering that figured this one out and
there's a stylized diagram here of what
he suggested which was that alol is a
pair of stars and eclipsing binary where
you have a bright star and a dim star
and they are orbiting round such that
the they uh orbit carries one of them
into alternating between transiting
across the face of the brighter star and
then going behind it into eclipse and so
when the light is coming from both Stars
you see the
two the combined light but when the dim
star goes in front of the bright star it
drops the amount of light coming to us
considerably and you get the alternating
primary eclipses and then half an Orbit
later of course it goes into Eclipse
itself around behind the brighter
component so you just have the light
from the brighter component so you can
see how that works in the diagram there
and it gives us this bright dim bright
dim Eclipse cycle well the most modern
observations actually show this in
action this is a series of time-lapse
images from the Chara interferometer
looking in infrared and because it's
infrared the Precision um the sort of
pixel size is fairly large because the
wavelength is quite long the
uh shorter the wavelength of your
observations the more precise the
results tend to be so infrared images
can be a little blurry like this and
there's a certain amount of atmospheric
twinkling going on here but um what
we've got is the bright star sitting in
the middle and the dim companion
orbiting round it Crossing in front
blocking some of the light and then
going behind into Eclipse itself and if
we look at that with a more of a
simulation going to it uh plotted over
the top of the data you can see what's
going on the masses of the two bit
asymmetric so the rather than them both
orbiting some point between them the
center of mass is very much tipped
towards the central a star and so it's
fairly reasonable to look at it like
this with B orbiting around the outside
of a so fascinating story to tell just
of the early observations and the most
recent interpretation of what's going on
with these two stars but it turns out
things get a little bit more interesting
there are actually three stars it's a
triple star system photographed and
shown here we call them a b and c alol a
being the main star alol B orbiting
around it fairly closely and alol C at a
more distant uh longer orbit now
sometimes those get referred to as a A1
and a A2 and
a uh the a A1 and a A2 being so close
together that they're considered a pair
and the other one is separate more
distant but I'm going to call them A B
and C because it's easier to
say and a and b really are very close
together just a few million miles a few
million kilometers whichever you prefer
and that's
0.062 astronomical units an au is the
Earth Sun distance Venus orbits the Sun
at .7 Au and Mercury at 0.4 so these are
considerably closer than even Mercury is
to the Sun so very tight orbit indeed so
what do we know about these individual
Stars
well the a star is the most massive it's
3.2 times the mass of the Sun and a hot
blue white bclass star and that's a got
a surface temperature of 13,000 so
beyond white
hot that makes perfect sense up to a
point for a big star to be this hot
massive star still on the main sequence
burning ferociously and giving that high
temperature
the second star the B Star that's a k
class star with 0.7 times the mass of
the Sun and there's nothing very unusual
about that there are a lot of K class
dwarf
stars that are orange and uh temperature
about
4,500 on the surface giving them that
color and that have about
0.7 solar
masses but this one is different
it's three and a half times the radius
of our sun so it's a big distended
object and it's classed as an orange
subgiant now you don't hear very much
about orange subgiants they're pretty
rare so there's already something
unusual there and just for good measure
the C-Class star that's a fairly
ordinary f-class white star 9,000 Dees
1.8 times the mass of the Sun main
sequence nothing particularly Difficult
about that but when we date the system
looking at the components they were
probably all born the same around about
the same time probably born together in
a cluster
and the age comes out somewhere between
500 and 600 million years that's nothing
for a star that's very very young indeed
they've only really just about completed
two laps of the Galaxy our sons's done
20 it's nearly 10 times as old as these
guys so they should be in their first
flush of Youth and certainly it looks
like that for the a star and the B Star
there's nothing terribly unusual about
them for their mass and their
brightness but there's something funny
going on with the B
Star ordinary K class orange
dwarfs should live a 100 billion years
and should remain burning away steadily
doing hydrogen to helium sequence
operations inside themselves um and
maintaining their color and temperature
for a very long time before the helium
starts to build in the core and then
they would uh likely ex band into a
giant star but this one it's far far too
young we're we're talking factors of
many factors of 10 too young to have
burnt through its fuel uh for a 0.7
solar mass star should be in the first
flush of Youth so how come it appears to
have manufactured a a helium core and
driven itself into the late stages of
swelling up into an orange giant which
doesn't make any sense it's a real
Paradox um you can see the uh Herz
sprung Russell diagram we've got the sun
on there um in the middle of the main
sequence and so an orange dwarf down
there would follow that track um the the
150 million year track uh on the diagram
there that's actually how they form so
they would form more slowly but after
they've evolved they would then uh stay
on that track for a very very long time
and uh this is a bit of a paradox it
just doesn't make sense for the B Star
to be a giant when it's only 500 million
years
old so what's going on well we think
Mass transfer we think that the A and B
stars are so close together that the B
Star was originally the larger of the
two much more massive and as a more
massive star perhaps as massive as five
solar masses or more it would have
rapidly burned through its Fuel and
evolved into a large red
giant and as such the outer layers
puffing away moving outwards would
become uh only Loosely bound to the main
star they would actually go outside
what's called the rash limit and they
would be then able to flow over onto the
companion increasing the mass of the
smaller star so perhaps a few hundred
million years into the life of the pair
the larger companions run out of fuel
built a helium core swollen up and then
started tipping all of its outer laay
containing loads of hydrogen over in a
continuous flow onto the then smaller
AAR that had been burning away in the
main sequence as a fairly modest star
perhaps even less than the mass of the
Sun at that stage but an awful lot of
mass has transferred over that one is
now built up to being about three and a
half times the mass of the sun and is
become a blue uh large main sequence
star um most of what flowed over would
have been the outer layers which would
have been the leftover hydrogen in the
outer regions of the red giant and so
it's rejuvenated and fed the uh lifetime
of that companion star keeping it young
for its age and it is actually because
uh at 3.2 times the mass of the Sun 500
million years would be enough for it to
start showing the signs of age and start
turning into a giant itself but it
hasn't really aged that much because of
this constant rejuvenating flow of
hydrogen but it will now and it will
catch up it will start to age rapidly
and will begin to expand in itself um
and uh well with just that sort of tiny
distance between them it's going to
swell up and the result is going to be
these two stars are really orbiting
inside one large envelope before too
much longer so it could be uh very
interesting because that's we're talking
millions of years so we'll never see
it so that's the second really weird
thing about this uh combination we've
got the eclipsing binary and we've got
this uh algol Paradox as they call it
which is probably explained by this Mass
transfer now the other thing that I dug
out about alol was a a paper from the
University of Helsinki by lorri yetu and
he has done some statistical analysis of
the light curves um and the spectrum of
the group and he thinks there are more
companions maybe as many as five more
stars so this could be an eight star
system an octuple star system all
orbiting round a Common Center of mass
now these others are too dim to observe
uh at the moment so they're probably
very faint red dwarf
stars but they could be large brown
dwarfs um that have failed to ignite
nuclear fusion in their core perhaps
less than 75 times the mass of Jupiter
which is the uh limit for that sort of
ignition to occur 7.5 times uh 7.5% of
the mass of the sun
and there was one other fact about alol
which I uh came across which is we've
measured the distance 94 light years um
and it seems to be moving away from us
the total mass as we know is about six
times the mass of the
Sun and that's fairly Hefty but uh
around 7 million years ago it passed
within 10 light years of the Sun so it's
94 light years away now and receding but
7 million years ago it did a relatively
close pass just 10 light years and
that's close enough that that larger
Mass might have had some disruptive
effects disturbing some of the Comets in
the earth Cloud so it's another one of
these stars that has passed by the Sun
and may have influenced the orbits of uh
Those Distant icy bodies about a light
year out from the uh the sun you can do
the maths and figure that uh the point
of balance between six solar masses and
one solar mass is going to be a fairway
between the two um and so they would be
would have been feeling at about one
light year they would have from the Sun
they would have been feeling almost as
much gravity from the alol system as
from the Sun perhaps we could do the
maths if we really wanted
to so that's it for alol the demon star
I hope you've enjoyed that one and uh
I'll uh be back with another interesting
celestial object sometime soon thanks